---
entry: welcome-to-learning
title: Welcome to learning!
comments: true
layout: blog-post
---

Hey everybody, welcome to Learning! Thank you so much for using my platform <3.

## What is Learning?

Learning is a completely free and opensource lms platform (udemy-like), as all
of those well-known websites you can also create your courses by cloning and
modifying the source code, you can create/delete/modify already existing
courses, lessons, blog entries and even create your own learning-based platform.

## Is this really free?

Yes, it is. Since the beginning of this year I wanted to create a LMS website
which will be free, at the very beginning it was supposed to be a hacking-only
courses site, but then it became "Learning". (You can see the previous version
of "Learning" at [h4ck1ngb00tc4mp.gq](https://h4ck1ngb00tc4mp.gq)).

<hr>

The first course "[Introduction to pentesting](/Intro-to-pentesting/)" is ported
from h4ck1ngb00tc4mp as I already wrote it there, it is some kind of updated
version of the Pat Engebretson's book "Introduction to pentesting". It's a very
extensive course, I hope you like it. I'll work in programming and hacking
courses, remember you can create yours (more info [here](/contributing)) and
support Learning to grow.

As it is free you won't receive any money for you courses, lessons or
contributions, I started out this project for people who want to help the others
with their knowledge, as it is power.

<hr>

I started developing Learning yesterday (2020-09-22) and because of its short
time alive there is still a lot to do. There are quite a lot of "TODO's" around
the code of this platform. If you can code and know how to use Jekyll I'd be so
grateful if you want to contribute code, if you can't or don't like to, you can
also contribute ideas for courses, new features, etcetera.

I am not an english speaker native so I may commit some errors throughout this
website, if you can tell me when I comitted an error and teach me how to fix it
It'll help me a lot.

Thank you so much for visiting Learning.

/Sarah
