---
title: Introduction
course: c_beginners
section: "Introduction"
layout: lesson
---

Before we can begin to write serious programs in C, it would be interesting to
find out what really is C, how it came into existence and how does it compare
with other computer languages. In this section, we will briefly outline these
issues.

Four important aspects of any language are the way it stores data, the way it
operates upon this data, how it accomplishes input and output and how it lets
you control the sequence of execution of instruction in a program. We will
discuss the first three of these blocks in this section.

# What is C?

C is a programming language developt at AT & T's Bell Laboratories of USA in 1972.
It was designed and written by a man named Dennis Ritchie. In the late
seventies, C began to replace the more familiar languages of that time like
PL/I, ALGOL, etcetera. No one pushed C. It wasn't made the 'offical' Bell Labs
language. Thus, without any advertisement C's reputation spread and its pool of
users grew. Ritchie seems to have been rather surprised that so many programmers
preferred C to older languages like FORTRAN or PL/I, or the newer ones like
Pascal and APL. But, that's what happened.

Possibly why C seems so popular, is because it is reliable, simple and easy to
use. Moreover, in an industry where newer languages tools and technologies
emerge and vanish day in and day out, a language that has survived for more than
3 decades has to be really good.

An opinion that is often heard today is: "_C has been already superceded by
languages like C++, C# and Python, so why bother to lean C today_". I seriously
beg to differ with this opinion. There are several reasons for this:

1. C is a Middle-Level language.

2. Major parts of popular operating systems like Windows, Linux and MacOS X are
   still written in C. This is because even today when it comes to performance
   (speed of execution) nothing beats C. Moreover, if one is to extend the
   operating system to work with new devices, one needs to write the device's
   driver programs. These programs are exclusively written in C.

3. Many popular gaming frameworks have been built using C language.

4. At time you would be required to very closely interact with the hardware
   devices. Since C provides several language elements that make this
   interaction feasible without compromising the performance it is the preferred
   choice for the programmer.

I hope that these are very convincing reasons why you should adopt C as the
first and the very important step in your quest for learning programming
languages.
